do you support the arts of course you do
nobody wants to be singled out as a
group as a boer as an
unrefined uneducated individual who does
not support the arts we all want to
pretend we support the arts
even if we spend absolutely zero of our
time
energy effort or money in any meaningful
sense supporting earth do you think
do you think the government should take
taxpayers money
and spend it supporting the arts uh uh
uh well
um do you mean the government paying for
public education in the arts so that
poverty-stricken children
can learn to paint and draw when their
parents otherwise wouldn't be able to
afford
uh pencils or paper or or paints
do you mean the government spending
money so that groups of poverty-stricken
schoolchildren will be taken to museums
that actually have
free admission anyway that their
poverty-stricken parents couldn't
afford to take uh uh no don't question
it no debate
no discussion do you support uh
government funders yes yes of course you
do
you want to be a refined sophisticated
urban intellectual you don't want to be
a boer
you do not want to be an unrefined
retrograde conservative who would dare
to question
government funding for the arts not even
if it's millions of dollars going into
the film industry
not even if it's millions of dollars
going down the drain not even when you
read the list of what the government is
spending money on for the arts it seems
not just questionable or dubious but
tragic no no
no no shut all of that out of your mind
we all support the arts
we all support government funding for
the arts
unless or until it's a statue
on your block that you can see out
your window unless or until
it's a statue two and a half stories
tall
that is unbelievably ugly that is an
unbelievably poor taste it's a statue
you're going to have to look at
every time you open the window of your
apartment
every time you walk from your apartment
building
to the grocery store now all of a sudden
questions about
democracy come into very sharp
focus who decided that this statue
should be built here it's suddenly it's
not a matter of money at all suddenly oh
i'd rather pay 10 million dollars more
and have some other statute but not
this statue we didn't have a referendum
on this statue
we didn't choose the statute we don't
have direct democracy and who
who did choose the statute is it someone
we elected no
someone you elected sat in a council
that indirectly appointed someone
to hire someone to sit on a board
that selected this this stitch when you
look into it
board by board statue by statue there
may be several more
steps removing the people who made the
decision
from anyone who was ever elected at any
time ah
and the people who made this decision
the bureaucrats who rule and decide so
much
in our society these days
you can probably find some clips of them
on youtube
giving a deposition to city hall or
speaking at the arts council or maybe
even delivering a paper
at the university it may strike you that
they're not
particularly bright they're not
particularly
endowed with any great um facility of
mine
that would allow them to distinguish
good taste from bad
it may strike you that these people are
on the whole
rather stupid and even if they
went to art school and got an arts
degree
these are not the people who went on to
be successful artists
these are the people who one way or
another went on to become
successful bureaucrats who had careers
as
parasites on the government-funded side
of the art world who didn't get out and
innovate but even if they were
innovators
even if these were the most brilliant
fashionable and edgy of artists
that's really not the purpose of public
art that's not the purpose
of monument making now i have to
disclose
that i have a very particular bias here
my family's fortune comes out of the
monument-making business
right i said many cynical things about
the making of monuments that influenced
my parents
it might be rare to talk about the child
influencing the parents
watch more on my youtube channel get to
know me and it'll be easier and easier
for you to imagine that i was in some
ways a much more powerful influence on
my parents
than they ever were on me uh my parents
worked in the
museum planning business but they were
involved in public art projects of every
kind
which certainly included literal
monuments and also included
institutions like museums that were
created for a
commemorative or monumental function
one of my comments that my parents
quoted back to me many times and they
quoted between themselves
that really stayed with them was my
simple comment
pardon me was my simple comment
a monument nothing is
easier to build and nothing
is more easily ignored
i lived through a period of time
in which the canadian government was not
interested
in actually helping cree people actually
helping
ojibwe people actually helping den a
people
they were interested in erecting
monuments
and these monuments are much cheaper
than
even employing 10 high school teachers
then employing 10 specialists with phds
in linguistics
to study and teach and propound and
preserve the cree language or the ojibwe
language
to do something meaningful if you just
do a little rough calculation here
if you employ 10 people who are being
paid 100 000
a year that's a million dollars so you
get into multi-million dollar budgets
really quick
with real education with making a real
difference in the real world and yeah
guys let's you know let's not turn the
page on history too fast here
first nations people also deal with very
very simple problems that have
multi-million dollar solutions
like clean drinking water you know do
you remember the ada wapiscat
crisis like water and shelter and you
know
access to education in the most literal
physical sense of having a building
in which they can receive education
there are there are problems here
with multi-million dollar solutions
pressing and you know there was this
thing written called the rcap
the royal commission on aboriginal
peoples this long checklist of exactly
what the government was supposed to do
to make the situation better
and the government did absolutely zero
of the things on that checklist there
are a lot of interesting questions we
have but you know what stops people
asking questions building a monument
nothing
you know nothing solves the problem of
genocide and slavery and colonialism
and language extinction like putting up
a monument
and these monuments that were made in my
generation
i'm 42 years old now
they were neither in a classical
european style nor in any kind of
traditional
cree ojibwe indigenous
first nation style right they put up
monuments that were
in vulgar conservative right-wing terms
modern abstract crap
i remember one statue that was made to
louis riel
if you don't know who louis riel is big
deal in canada
forgotten in the rest of the world louis
riel
ended up leading a failed rebellion
against the government of canada he was
a highly eccentric
religious visionary he wasn't some
proto-marxist left-wing uh
you know leader of a poor people's
revolution and his own life in politics
was very much actually a hybrid
of european and indigenous culture he
wasn't an example of a kind of untouched
uh uh yet to be colonized intact
uh indigenous culture he was an example
of a culture that already over centuries
had responded to and appropriated
elements of european culture not least
of all
christianity okay he was a christian
fanatic
who led this this uprise right but
interesting
historical figure certainly very
significant
and there are monuments including
monuments in downtown toronto that i
have seen
celebrating the fact that the british
troops the white
troops the pro-genocide troops conquered
and put down that rebellion and
ultimately killed the supporters
of louisville and then during my
lifetime what do we do
we start putting up statues to instead
commemorate
as some kind of hero louis brielle
and the leaders of that rebellion what
could be
what could be cheaper and what could be
more
easily ignored and i remember i'm
thinking of one statue
in particular i remember one statue
and first nations people complained one
this is not in our style like this isn't
our idea
of art you know many i mean it's canada
is a
wider country but there are many
distinctive
first nations styles of statuary and art
i would say it's not like there's just
one
style it's not just one style for the
cree but you could choose to make a
statue that is distinctively first
nations and it's
it's aesthetics no and then on the other
hand
this does not look like a statue in
france
or berlin to a great historical figure
this does not look like a statue to
masana in the plasmasina
in france right this knows and they said
quite understandably
this is not a statue that white people
would accept as a commemoration of
a great or famous historical white
person so
why do you think this is good enough for
us
and they pointed out quite correctly
there was absolutely no resemblance
between the statue and the historical
figure himself they didn't
the face the body there was no
resemblance between these things
it was an expressive modern
abstract approach you know to statuary
so we've been living through a period of
time
in which real and meaningful political
crises
have been distracted from by instead
indulging in the politics
of creating monuments to
monumentality this is another
catchphrase that my parents picked up on
and they credited me for their rhythms
very often when the government creates
monuments
they do not symbolize or be token or
communicate
anything aside from monumentality
itself except that it is an expression
of the government's power
to reshape your neighborhood your public
park
your vista your view out the window your
life
by creating a monument at any place at
any time
there is no democratic process there is
no
vote there is no consultation with the
public i want to say this
i had a recent video talking about what
were the really distinctive elements
of ancient greek democracy okay
the ancient greeks voted on
everything including and especially
the arts when the ancient greeks went to
see a concert
when they went to see a comedy they were
competitive they regarded
theater as a competitive sport
and the audience voted and that was the
basis of their system of trials
and of justice in the same way that the
audience
sat in judgment over a work of art
the audience sat in judgment at a trial
and i have to say the same thing
in an imperfect parallel talking about
canada's
phony democracy our hollow democracy our
false democracy
is that we have bureaucrats who are in
no way
democratic in no way responsive to or
responsible to the people they
quote unquote represent right we have
bureaucrats who decide
what is art what is the monument that
should be built
right and we have bureaucrats who decide
what is justice
who is innocent and who is guilty right
we have a total bureaucratization
of what is ultimately a british
parliamentary tradition
this is what we are burdened with in
canada so the problem with public art
i think reflects the much deeper and
much
broader problem in our society now
first things last guys there is a
difference
between fashion and style
fashion can change every six months
fashion can change
every three months and it affects and
influences the lives
of a small percentage of the population
that small percentage population
may be very powerful influential
cosmopolitan magazine announces
that this summer it's gem tones
this is a memory from about five years
ago remember there was one summer
gem tones that was it cosmopolitan
magazine and all those fashion
get out and buy a new wardrobe because
we're wearing gem tones this summer
okay what percentage of women actually
did it what percentage women were
influenced by
what percentage of women read
cosmopolitan magazine
unironically to inform them as they go
out and buy a new wardrobe as they go
out and buy a new closet full of clothes
for what they're going to wear this
summer i don't even believe it's ten
percent of the population like
it may be five percent i know it's not
nobody there's a small percentage of
women
who live and die by fashion and fashions
change
every six months every three months
that's fashion okay
there are new movies in the movie
theater
every three months every six months at
most
right the point of a public
monument is not to do something
fashionable it's not to do something
edgy it's not to do something that seems
artistically important
this moment here and now that is what
art
for galleries is about okay art
in art galleries changes every three
months
like movies in the movie theater there
are fashions
for new art in art galleries that can
change in our written about in magazines
magazines that no offense nobody in this
audience reads
how many of you subscribed to the art
newspaper have you ever heard of the art
newspaper how many of you are actually
following
the fashions of what's going on in art
galleries
in paris berlin milan it's not expensive
it's expensive in terms of your time you
can subscribe to the art newspaper today
my parents did my parents were in the
tiny percentage of people who were
following what was going
on in art galleries at the leading edge
right okay the purpose of
public art the purpose of monuments
is to make a very different kind of
artistic statement
that yes does fade into the background
that yes
is easily ignored stylistically
you are creating something that is going
to stand there
not for six months and not for six years
not for decades but for centuries
and that is why there is one style
of public art one style of monument
that you find in france whether you are
in paris
or in the cote d'azur or in normandy
there is one
style of statue that is appropriate
for a monument to a mass grave a mass
murder
you know an atrocity from world war ii
and it is equally appropriate
to commemorating a great hero or an
abstract concept like
liberty and the revolution throughout
france you see these statues again and
again
coast to coast north to south east to
west there is one
style and it lasts for centuries and
when people look out their window
when people walk past it to get their
groceries
it is easily ignored
monuments nothing is cheaper
and nothing is more easily ignored